>> Good morning.
My name is John Hess and today I'm going
to be joined by my colleague Mike Ferris.
And the two of us are going to tell you about state
of the art Cocoa application development on Mac OS X.
Mac OS X has a whole host of technologies that
are available for you to use in your applications.
And it's our aim today to take you on a tour of each of
these technologies so that you can see what's applicable
to your application and help most effectively plan
your session attendance for the remainder of the week.
I'm going to start today by telling you
about some code clarifying technologies.
These are technologies that you can use to help
your application focus on what it does best.
You can eliminate the code that's common to
all sorts of applications and really just focus
on the features that you deliver to your users.
First, I'd like to talk about garbage
collection and Objective-C properties.
These are two technologies that you can use to
help manage object life cycles in your application.
Now, if you've written a manually memory managed application
on Mac OS X before, there are a couple of problems
that you need to, that you've been
aware of or potentially had to debug.
For example, if you over release an object or free it
too aggressively, you've probably run into a problem
with your application crashing,
perhaps due to memory corruption.
These bugs are typically very difficult
to diagnose and correct.
Additionally you may have forgot
to release an object or to free it.
Doing this typically results in a memory leak
in your application, which could range anywhere
from being a small performance
problem to a major show stopping bug.
Additionally you've had to worry
about the problem of retain cycles.
A retain cycle is where you have one object
that has a strong reference to a second object
and that second object has a strong
reference back to the first.
This is a specialized form of leak and these two objects
retaining each other causes them both to stay alive.
Now, you may have even become good at
diagnosing these problems and fixing them,
but you're having to devote mental capacity in
order to keep your application functioning properly
and to not commit these sort of
problems in your application.
Garbage collection that comes to us on Mac OS X, 10.5
Leopard with Objective-C helps you just eliminate worrying
about these type of problems in your application.
Garbage collection can also give you a bit
of concurrency for free in your application.
If you have one thread in your application that's
busy computing results for some important user task,
the objects that you're generating while
doing this computation can be collected
in the background by the garbage collector.
This gives you some immediate concurrency.
There are a couple of things you need to
know when migrating to garbage collection.
One of them is that there are many
APIs that you might interact
with that aren't themselves dealing
with garbage detective memory.
For example, if you're using core
foundation types in your application,
you'll still need to call CF release
and CF retain on them manually.
Optionally you can opt those CF type objects into
garbage collection with the CF make collectible call.
A second technique that's available to us
through Objective-C 2.0 are properties.
Properties are all about simplifying the way that we
declare, define and use the attributes of our object.
The best way to talk about properties
is with an illustration.
Here we have a hypothetical My Person class and
we're looking at the header file for that class.
In that header file, we have a number
of accessors declared to control things
such as the first name, the last name, and the full name.
If we were to flip to the implementation file for
this source file, we'd see code similar to this.
This code isn't interesting, it's kind of
long, and it's exactly the kind of code
that you're going to gloss right over during code review.
This makes it susceptible to problems
like copy and paste bugs
where you have one property that's inadvertently
controlling the wrong instance variable.
Objective-C properties help us eliminate
these problems in our source code.
So here's an example of the same class
implemented with Objective-C properties.
The first thing you'll probably notice
is that in the interface for this class,
we've used this new Ap Property compiler directive.
The Ap Property compiler directive tells the
compiler this class is going to have an accessor pair
for in this case a first name property
that's of type string.
And that copy indicates that when setting the string
for the first name, we're going to use copy semantics.
We've done the same thing for last name and then
declared an additional read only property full name.
That full name property is declared read only because
it's actually a derived property that we're going
to base off of the first name and last name.
If we flip to the implementation file, the first thing
you'll probably notice is that it fits all here on one page.
It's very short.
All the redundancy of getters and setters is eliminated.
We're able to use the At Synthesize compiler directive
to ask the compiler to automatically generate getters
and setters for our first name and last name properties
that correspond to the properties in our interface file.
We're also able to go ahead and
implement the full name accessor our self.
This allows us to have full control over the
implementation of properties if we'd like them.
And it's a great place for us to add custom logic for
properties that are based on the values of other properties.
In addition to helping you declare and implement
accessors for your attributes, properties also give you,
give clients a new way to access state of objects.
And that's with the dot syntax.
The dot syntax is syntactic sugar that still translates
to the familiar getter and setter messages at runtime.
But by using the dot syntax, you
can be more clear in your code.
It's clear when you see person.firstname = Bill
that you're just configuring the person object.
Another benefit of using the dot
syntax is better code completion.
If you were to type [person codecomplete] in X Code,
you'd get a list of all selector messages
which are valid to send to this person.
That's going to include lots of messages
that are valid for every NS object.
With properties, you get exactly the set of
properties that are available to this object,
which gives you a much more precise code completion list.
So properties help you clarify your API
and give you a nice concise expression.
In your header file, it's really clear what
method you use to configure the state of an object
when you use the At Property compiler directive.
And it lets you clearly differentiate between state and
behavior because if you adopt properties everywhere,
all of the property methods are used to configure
state and all of the other messages are used
to make the object do things that control its behavior.
If you'd like to learn more about garbage
collection in Objective-C properties,
tomorrow at 5 PM in Russian Hill the Objective-C and
garbage collection advancement session will take place.
The next set of technology that I'd like
to look at are things that you can use
to help eliminate model view controller
glue code in your applications.
The first of these is key-value observing.
Key-value observing is all about eliminating the
direct coupling of your controllers from your models.
In a model view controller application, it's the model's
job to notify the controller when changes take place.
And that typically means that you have to have
a manual notification code in your models.
Now where that code is and how it
gets posted is typically really driven
by how your controllers want to interpret those messages.
And so you really do have sort of the design of
the controllers driving the design of the model.
You can help break that down and have two more
independent set of classes by using key-value observation.
Key-value observation is a way for a controller object
or really any object to register that it's interested
in change notifications for a second object.
So a key in key-value coding is just a
short string like first name, or last name,
or full name if we were to consider
our people example earlier.
And a controller object that's managing people can register
for change notifications whenever a person object changes.
Now all a person object needs to do to
cooperate with key-value observation
and be observable is really just use its
own setters in order to mutate its state.
Key-value observation is really a foundational technology.
Lots of things are built on top of it.
An example of something that's built on top
of key-value observation is Cocoa Bindings.
Cocoa Bindings really let you eliminate the
whole swaths of model view controller glue code.
So for example, in a typical model view controller
application, you might have a window with a text field on it
and when the text field has a value entered in it
by the user, the text field notifies a controller.
And the controller reacts to that value being
entered and decides to modify a model object.
The model object might have cascading changes that
are caused by this change and after the changes,
while all the changes occur the
model notifies the controller.
Which in turn captures those notifications
of changes to reupdate the view.
This is exactly the kind of code that
Cocoa Bindings eliminate for you.
They help do that data passing all the way from your
view to your model and back again without you having
to write code to shuttle it at each stage.
So the way you use Cocoa Bindings are you can go into for
example Interface Builder and select some element that's
in your user interface and you can tell that
element that it is bound to a specific attribute.
For example first name on a controller where
that controller manages a list of people.
And now you'll have a text field that's able
to control the first name attribute of people.
Cocoa Bindings make it really easy to deal with things
like multiple selection or single selection of course
or not applicable selection or an empty selection.
They really make it as easy as handling
the standard single selection case.
So using Cocoa Bindings is a great way
to eliminate model view controller code
from your application while still
keeping a model view controller design.
You can learn more about Cocoa Bindings
in Exploring Cocoa Bindings tutorial lab.
That's today at 330 PM in Mac OS X lab B.
Next I'd like to look at some refactoring
opportunities that are available to you
with new classes in the AppKit and new language features.
The first of these are view controllers.
View controllers are all about dividing up the discrete
areas of responsibility inside of multi -component windows.
So here's an example of a common interface lay
out that we'll see in applications on Mac OS X.
I like to call it the master master detail interface.
So in this application, we might have a source list
where a selection in the source list drives what appears
in the content area, which is probably another list.
And selection in the content area
drives what appears in the detail area.
An application that uses this pattern might be mail
where you have your mailboxes in the source section,
your messages in the content section, and the
content of each message in the detail section.
RSS readers and X Code are another example of
applications, which typically follow this pattern.
So view controllers are available to you in Mac
OS 10.5, Leopard through the application kit
and are really a formalized way for you to break
down this sort of application in your source code.
Before view controllers, you might have implemented
such a window with just one monolithic window controller
where the window controller is responsible for managing
the source list, the content list, and the detail area.
Or you might have written your own set
of classes to break this functionality
down into its different discrete components.
But that would've been something you rolled yourself.
You might not have followed that pattern consistently.
By using view controllers in your application,
you can use the same sort of pattern everywhere
and really cleanly factor your source code.
That'll help make it more malleable in the future should
you decide to change the way your application works.
Another exciting technology that's
available on Snow Leopard are blocks.
Blocks are really changing the
way we do all sorts of things.
Blocks are all about making callbacks dead simple.
One of the complicated parts of doing
callbacks before blocks is context management.
Typically the callback function that you'd like to have
invoked by some service needs some data to be passed to it.
Blocks eliminate out of band data passing
between context functions and the person
that invoked the operation that
was going to involve a callback.
I'd like to illustrate blocks with an example.
We have the people object we talked about
earlier and this is going to be a method
that sorts those people objects by a particular key.
Where key is something like the first name or the last name.
It's the same kind of key that we
would use in key-value observation.
And we want to do a stable sort.
And if you're not familiar with a stable sort, a
stable sort doesn't mean that it's not a buggy sort.
It means a sort that's going to sort in a specific order.
For example, if you have two objects in the input array
that would be tied in terms of the comparison function,
they'll appear in the output array in the
order they appeared in the original array.
So for example, if our original array had two people
Matt Gamble and Matt Furlick appearing in this order,
and they were sorted based on the first name, there
would be a tie because they're both named Matt.
With a stable sort, Matt Gamble who appeared first in the
original array would appear first in the output array.
Many sort routines are not stable.
And so they don't give you the same variant.
But you can always build a stable sort on top of an
unstable sort by taking the original order of your objects
into account in your comparison function.
That's what I'm going to do in this example.
So to do this we're going to build a map table.
The map table is going to hold an entry
for every person that we're sorting.
We're going to populate that by iterating all
the people in order and putting an integer
into the map table that's the index at which
that person appeared in the people array.
Then we're going to ask the array to sort itself.
And to sort the array, we're going to
pass in a my compare people function.
Now that's a function pointer.
And our my compare people function
needs to know how we're sorting.
For example by first name or by last name.
And it needs some, and it also needs to know the original
order of the object so that it can do a stable sort.
To do this, we use this context parameter
that we're needing to pass out of line.
Now we'll scroll up.
You'll see some other code that I have
to write in order to make this happen.
I've got to declare a structure to hold this context.
These are the arguments that I want to pass
out of line to my compare people function.
And additionally I've got my function.
Now this is the meat of my whole routine.
This is what's actually doing the sorting.
It's the most interesting part.
But it's not, it's not in there with the rest of my code.
I'm having to spread everything out across an entire file.
Let's look at how we do this with blocks.
Here I'm going to use exactly the same techniques, but
it's going to take a lot less code and I'm going to get
to write my code in the order I think
about performing the operations.
So I'll declare the order table just as
before, but then I'm going to use a new method
on NS array called enumerate objects using block.
This method takes a block and the
block takes three parameters.
The object that's being countered during the
enumeration, the index that that object occurred at,
and an out parameter that I can
use to terminate iteration early.
We're going to visit all the objects
and build up our table just like before.
Then we're going to ask the people
array for a sorted version of itself.
And we're going to use the new NS array method
from Snow Leopard, sorted array using comparator.
This method also takes a block and
that block takes two arguments.
A person A and a person B and it's our job to declare
through the return value of this block what the order is
that those two people should appear in the output array.
We're going to sort them exactly as we did before.
You'll notice here that it didn't have to have any
structure to declare the arguments that I wanted to pass
into my callback function because in this
case the callback function is a block.
And the block is able to close over the lexical scope
of where it's created and access all those variables.
So here in my block callback I'm able to just
access our order table and our key argument
without having to have any out of line data.
This really helps me write the code
in the order that I think about it.
It just flows much more naturally.
It also helps me keep my file name space tidy.
I don't have to have these pieces of functionality
that are exactly interesting to one function living
at file name space and sort of being available
for example in the X Code, function pop up
or just you know being potentially interesting to people
when really they're particular to my one function.
So you can learn more about blocks in
Programming with Blocks in Grand Central Dispatch.
That's tomorrow at 2 PM in the Marina.
That concludes the code clarifying technologies
that I wanted to take you through today.
Now I'd like to look at some performance opportunities.
Everything is 64-bit.
You should absolutely be making your
application 64-bit for Mac OS X Snow Leopard.
One of the main features that you're going to
get by migrating to 64-bit are there are twice
as many registers available in X8664 architecture
versus the previous I386X architecture.
This is going to mean that the code that
your application, that the compiler generates
for your application is going to be able to run faster.
When we added Objective-C 2.0 to
Leopard, there were some features
that we couldn't add without breaking binary compatibility.
And we never want to break binary compatibility.
So in order to add these features, we
only added them to the new 64-bit runtime.
While not having a history, we could, we could
change things there and give you some new features.
An example of some of those are
no fragile base class problem.
So you can redeclare instance variables in a
framework class that's sub classed in other binaries
without having to recompile the other classes.
You also get instance variable synthesis, which means that
you don't have to declare instance variables to match each
of the properties that you're using
with ApProperty and ApSynthesize.
And finally you get zero cost unified exceptions.
This means that the same exception
mechanism is used for C++ and Objective-C.
And it means that entering a try block is cheap.
Before entering a try block was
expensive and now it's really inexpensive.
All apps should be 64-bit on Sdnow Leopard.
We're increasingly shipping more
and more of our content as 64-bit.
We have, today I'm telling you all about
frameworks and technologies and all these frameworks
and technologies you get to leverage really cheaply in your
application because we've written lots of code for you.
All of that code that we've written is compiled two ways.
It's compiled for 32-bit and it's compiled for 64-bit.
And when you run your application as either
a 64-bit process odr a 32-bit process,
you automatically use the right set of this code.
Now at the point where we get to having no 32-bit processes,
none of that 32-bit framework stack will need to be loaded.
And if you're the last application on
the user's machine that's running 32-bit,
it's going to mean that your application is
going to fault in all of those frameworks.
And that's going to be expensive both
in terms of I/O time and memory usage
because all those 32-bit frameworks aren't
going to be amortized across multiple processes.
They'll only be used by yours.
So don't be the last 32-bit application on a user's machine.
Finally, you should absolutely use the 64-bit transition
guide when transitioning your application to 64-bit.
It's a guide that points out lots of things that you need to
be aware of when transitioning to 64-bit and it adlso comes
with a helpful conversion script that does
much of brunt work of translation for you.
The next technology that I'd like to discuss
with you today is Grand Central Dispatch.
Concurrency is a unifying theme in Snow Leopard.
As our machines have more and more CPU cores, we have
to leverage parallelism to make our applications faster.
Now, I like to start thinking about Grand Central
Dispatch by thinking of a technique called thread pooling.
If you have an application with lots of units of work
that you'd like to do, for example an application
like X Code you might want to index dozens,
hundreds, or thousands of source files.
You could do this by just creating one thread
for each source file you wanted to index.
But if you had 1000 source files,
that would be very expensive.
It would be expensive because scheduling threads takes
time and threads all require data in order to operate.
They all have large stack space, hundreds of kilobytes.
So you don't want to create a huge number of
threads proportional to your number of jobs.
Instead you want to create a number of threads proportional
to the execution resources that are actually available
on your machine and then have your
jobs run on those threads.
A problem with this technique in many times is
that lots of libraries implement this internally.
And then rather than each library creating just the right
number of threads, you wind up with N times as many threads
as you should have given that where N is the
number of libraries that implement this technique.
Grand Central Dispatch comes in and implements
this technique at a low level in the system
so that everyone can be built on top of it
and we can get better system utilization
by creating just the right number
of threads on each machine.
So Grand Central Dispatch works in terms of blocks.
It uses blocks as the currency of concurrency.
Each block is one unit of work or
one task that you might want to do.
And with Grand Central Dispatch,
you schedule those blocks on queues.
You can schedule them on two kinds of queues.
The first kind a serial queue.
You schedule blocks on a serial queue and they'll
run in the order they were added to the queue.
But you have lots of queues that are serial queues
and each queue runs independently and concurrently
with respect to the rest, but serially internally.
You also have concurrent queues.
A concurrent queue is a place where you can place
a block and just have it execute concurrently
with respect to all of your other queues and blocks.
So Grand Central Dispatch gives
you new synchronization concepts.
Rather than perhaps having a mutual exclusion law
that you use to protect shared data and you run code
for multiple threads and use the block for
exclusion, you can actually run all of your code
that accesses the shared data on the same thread by
guarding it with one Grand Central Dispatch queue
and placing blocks that access that data on the queue.
So because of blocks, this type of callback
mechanism to do concurrency becomes really easy.
You get to capture the state you want and execute it
on the right time on the right thread without having
to write a bunch of P Thread code to put that all together.
Besides just raw concurrency, Grand Central
Dispatch also gives you event monitoring.
You can use Grand Central Dispatch to
for example ask for a notification.
And the way you'll get a notification is by providing
a block and a queue that you'd like to be executed on.
And an example of such a notification would be
to have your block executed whenever file I/O becomes
available, perhaps on a socket that you're reading.
You can also monitor files moving on
disks, processes dying and UNIX signals.
Built on top of Grand Central Dispatch in Snow
Leopard is NSOperation and NSOperationQueue.
Now NSOperation and NSOperationQueue also predate
Grand Central Dispatch and exist on Leopard.
These are the Cocoa abstractions to
these parallel programming techniques.
By programming at this higher level, you can be
abstracted from how system changes happen underneath you.
Additionally you can target Leopard where NSOperation
and NSOperationQueue are also fully supported.
One feature that these classes offer above what you get
with Grand Central Dispatch is dependency management.
You can declare that some operation,
which is a unit of work just like a block
in Grand Central Dispatch, is dependent
on some other operations.
And you can queue them all together and the operation
system will figure out how to execute your operations
in the right order so that all
the dependencies are satisfied.
So I told you that concurrency was an important
theme for all of Snow Leopard and everywhere today.
We're backing that up with all these sessions.
You can get started learning about
concurrency in your Cocoa applications
in Designing your Cocoa Application for Concurrency.
And that's going to take place in
this same room today at 330 PM.
So Grand Central Dispatch and NSOperation I told you about
how to take advantage of your CPU and its multiple cores.
But if you really want to get maximum parallelism in
your application, you need to take advantage of all
of the execution cores that are available on your machine.
Your machine also has a GPU and it has dozens and dozens
of cores that are able to execute code extremely quickly.
Typically taking advantage of your GPU for general
purpose programming tasks has been difficult.
You've had to write vendor specific code and
only operate on machines that have hardware
that matches your vendor specific code that you used.
With OpenCL you get to program in a familiar C99-like
language that's cross-platform and an open standard.
By targeting the GPU you can get huge performance
increases by having lots of parallelism.
And these GPUs are great at executing
a specific kind of task.
And that's a data parallel task.
What I mean by data parallel, is that you have
the same block of code that you want to run over
and over again on different segments of data.
Your GPU is great at executing that.
Another benefit of targeting OpenCL
is OpenCL uses dynamic compilation.
That means that when you write your program in source form
and when it's time to run it, OpenCL compiles that program
down to the best instructions that
run on the GPU that's in your machine.
Additionally OpenCL can target the CPU and the CPU might run
a different set of instructions, well it's obviously going
to run a different set of instructions, than your GPU.
But where this gets interesting is when
your application is deployed on a machine
that doesn't have a fully programmable
GPU that can run your OpenCL program.
OpenCL lets you run that program on the CPU.
Thursday is the day for OpenCL
On Thursday in the Marina all day
you can learn about OpenCL.
At 9 AM, 1030 AM and 200 PM and then again in the
Graphics and Media Lab B at 330 PM are OpenCL sessions.
Now I'd like to talk to you about some
media technologies that are in Mac OS X
that you can use to really just dazzle your users.
The first of these is QT Kit.
QT Kit is the Cocoa interface to QuickTime and
QuickTime is the media framework for Mac OS X.
With QT Kit, you can leverage QuickTime to do media
playback, editing, capture, import, and export.
And what's exciting about QT Kit is that in
Snow Leopard, it's built on top of QuickTime 10.
QuickTime 10 is a lightweight media playback
framework with improved thread safety.
It's fully 64-bit and it supports modern codecs.
You can learn more about QT Kit and
QuickTime in Transitioning to QuickTime 10,
which takes place in the Marina today at 200 PM.
Next is OpenGL.
I told you all about how you can leverage your
GPU with OpenCL to do concurrent programming.
You can also use it for its original
task, which is great 2D and 3D graphics.
So on Mac OS X, OpenGL is the primary interface for the GPU.
And lots of the other media technologies that I'm
talking about today are built on top of OpenGL.
It's a really exciting time for OpenGL right now.
OpenGL 3.0 is improving and expanding rapidly.
OpenGL is available on all of our platforms so
you can do OpenGL programming on the iPhone.
We saw yesterday that OpenGL ES 2.0
is now available on the iPhone 3GS.
So it's a really great time for
OpenGL with lots of movement.
OpenGL Techniques for Snow Leopard is
taking place tomorrow in the Marina
at 1030 AM where you can learn more about OpenGL.
Next is Core Animation.
Core Animation is one of my favorite
of the media technologies.
Core Animation sits at a high level and
gives you a familiar object abstraction
for manipulating what they, what
Core Animation refers to as layers.
And layers are 2D pieces of co-ntent that live in a 3D space.
With Core Animation you get to define
implicit and explicit animations.
Explicit animations are the type of animations
you might expect where you say, take this object
and modify these properties and make
it take place over this amount of time.
Implicit animations are much more interesting.
With an implicit animation, you can go to some object and
configure it such that for example when the X parameter
of this object changes, it should be animated in this way.
Then later in your program you simply
change the X parameter of your objects
and they animate in the way you specified earlier.
Implicit animations make doing
animation with Core Animation great.
Core Animation also integrates with
all of our other media technologies.
So you can have custom OpenGL content
in your Core Animation layers,
you can have custom QuickTime content
and Quartz Composer compositions.
Finally Core Animation integrates
directly with Cocoa and Cocoa Touch.
So you can host a Core Animation layer
hierarchy right in an NS view or UI view.
Core Animation Techniques for iPhone and the Mac
is taking place tomorrow in the Mission at 900 AM.
You can go there to learn all about Core Animation.
The next application that I'd like to talk to
you about in media technology is Quartz Composer.
Quartz Composer ships with the development tools and
it's like a graphics IDE that you can use on Mac OS X.
You can use it for defining data
driven transitions and effects.
When you launch Quartz Composer, what
you work with is a network of patches.
Each patch is a computation unit
that has inputs and outputs.
And you bring lots of patches together into one document
and wire their inputs and outputs to each other in order
to form a data flow that describes
a transition or animation.
Quartz Composer comes with a library filled with
just dozens and dozens and dozens of patches.
One of the patches is an OpenCL
patch where you can write a custom,
where you can write custom OpenCL code
for your Quartz Composer compositions.
When you're working with Quartz
Composer, one of the great features is
that you get live previews of what
you're doing all the time.
So while you're in here working in a patch
editor, wiring your patches together,
you'll have a window on the screen that's
showing you exactly how your changes
to the patch configuration are going to
affect the transition that you're building.
You can use the Quartz Composer composition that you
build directly in a Quartz Composer view that's available
to Cocoa applications through Interface Builder.
You can also host your Quartz Composer content
directly in a Core Animation application via CLAR.
Quartz Composer Advances in Snow Leopard is
taking place tomorrow in the Marina at 500 PM.
There's also a follow on lab on Thursday
at 330 PM in the Graphics and Media Lab A.
Multi-Touch is really changing the way
that we think about user interfaces.
Ever since the iPhone brought Multi-Touch
to the foreground it's just been a great way
for the users to interact with your applications.
And on Mac OS X Snow Leopard the Application Kit is bringing
Multi-Touch and gesture support to your applications.
Now, Multi-Touch is the idea that you get to put two
fingers down on the track pad or maybe three fingers
or any amount really and do some gesture with them and
track all of those fingers moving in space independently.
Now on top of Multi-Touch, you
get to build things like gestures.
Where a gesture is an abstraction
of Multi-Touch that is something
like putting two fingers down and twisting, means to rotate.
Now rotate is a much more direct way by doing a gesture
like that for the user to interact with your application.
I find putting two fingers down and rotating
much more intuitive than selecting a text field
in an inspector and inputting an angle value.
So with the application kit on Snow Leopard, you
can leverage Multi-Touch directly through NS event
and you can leverage gestures through NS responder.
Gestures are actually available on Mac OS 10.5 and later.
And all of our current laptops have
Multi-Touch capable track pads.
So there's no reason not for you to start
adopting Multi-Touch in your applications today.
In this same room tomorrow at 330 PM,
you can learn about User Events in Cocoa
which will include information
about gestures and Multi-Touch.
The last technology that I'd like to
talk to you about today is Core Location.
Core Location is all about building location based services.
We saw in the keynote yesterday an example of
a Zip Car application that allowed the user
to find available cars that were near where they were at.
These kind of applications are great.
They make using them just a breeze.
You don't have to do awkward things like enter zip codes to
find out what information is relevant to where you're at.
I'm always impressed by the different Core Location and
location based service applications that I see on the iPhone
and I would like all of you to
consider adding location based services
to your applications and impressing me on Mac OS X.
You can do that now in the same
way that you do it on the iPhone.
It's really simple.
You just link the Core Location
framework into your application,
create an incidence of the CL Location
manager class, and attach a delegate to it.
And that delegate will get live notifications
of changes that occur in the user's location.
And you use that to build location based services.
So I'm really looking forward to how all of you can impress
me with location based services in your applications.
You can learn a little bit more about Core Location tomorrow
in the Presidio at 200 PM and with that I'd like to turn it
over to my colleague Mike Ferris to talk to
you about how you can handle data on Mac OS X.
>> Hi. I'm Mike Ferris and I work on XCode but today I'm
actually really happy to be able to be here to talk to you
about some cool Mac OS X technologies that you can
use in your applications to make them really great.
Now John talked a bit about some of the Objective-C language
features that are really useful to make great applications
as well as about some important new
foundational technologies and finally about some
of the presentation technologies to help
you to make your interface really great.
I'm going to concentrate on the data that your application
produces, what the user authors in your application.
Almost all applications let the user author data.
Data of lots of different types and so forth.
And mostly these applications break
down into one of two categories.
They can be document-based applications or they
can be what I like to call Shoebox applications.
In a document-based application, the user
is thinking about creating documents
They create separate documents for different purposes,
these documents aren't necessarily related to each other,
and the fact that the user is thinking about the
documents is key to a document-based application.
You can see examples of some document-based
applications from the icons up on the screen.
A Shoebox application on the other
hand, the user thinks about working
with their data altogether in your application.
Your application is actually the user's focus of attention.
And all of the data is in there being
organized within the application.
They're not thinking about authoring separate documents.
Examples of Shoebox applications include
things like iPhoto, Mail, Address Book.
People don't think about where they're saving these things.
They just know that all their stuff is in there.
Now regardless of which of these
types of applications you're creating,
there's a couple of decisions that
you should really make up front.
You want to decide whether to use
NSDocument and then you should decide whether
or not Core Data is an interesting technology for you.
Now these are actually independent questions that are not
mutually exclusive and let's tackle them one at a time.
Whether to use NSDocument, well that's an easy one.
If you're building a document-based
application, you should use NSDocument.
If you do, you'll get a lot of advantages.
You'll write a lot less code for
handling standard document functionality.
NSDocument deals with running Open and Save panels,
with tracking the dirty state of your document,
making sure that's coordinated
with per document Undo managers.
And with associating your documents with the windows
that contain the interfaces that present them.
Because of this, your document-based
app will get consistent behavior
with all the other document-based apps on the system.
They'll be more familiar to the user and the user will know
what to expect when it comes to how to deal with documents.
It's also worth considering that a lot of these
standard behaviors have complex subtleties
that are not necessarily really simple
to get right if you're doing it yourself.
So for example, NSDocument when it goes to save things
it makes sure to handle replacement warning dialogs,
it saves things atomically to provide better data safety.
It makes sure that the Recent Documents
menu tracks properly with changes
that you're making to where documents are stored.
And it has really good error handling
and presentation built right in.
You don't have to worry about that stuff.
Now, also NSDocument has integration with
a number of other important Cocoa features.
NSDocument works directly with the auto saving functionality
in Cocoa as well as with the new sudden termination APIs
to make sure that sudden termination gets
turned off when you have unsaved changes
in any of the documents in your application.
And then finally, if you're also using Core
Data, NSDocument integrates well with Core Data
through the NS persistent documents subclass.
You can go to either of the two Cocoa
Open Labs to learn more about NSDocument
and ask any questions that you might have.
And for documentation, you should start
with the Document-based Application Overview
and the Application Architecture Overview.
The second question is whether to use Core Data.
This one's actually a little bit more complicated.
It really depends what kind of
data your application works with.
Core Data is really good at managing
interconnected graphs of objects.
And if you have data that looks like that,
then Core Data may be a great fit for your app.
There are a couple of caveats.
First to use Core Data, you really have to be
able to define a fixed schema for your data.
If the structure of your data is too malleable or if
the user gets to change it and modify it on the fly,
the structure of your data, then
Core Data may not be the best fit.
Also Core Data isn't a client-server database solution.
So if you need to deal with database servers,
Core Data doesn't help you to solve that problem.
Now it may be that Core Data is a
really great fit for some of the data
that your application works with but not for other data.
That's fine, you can use Core Data for whatever
makes sense and then handle the rest of it yourself.
If you can use Core Data, it brings a lot of advantages.
Core Data has really great object graph management.
In fact, I'm going to talk about
that a little bit more in a moment.
It also has automatic support for
persistence, for data persistence in a number
of different file formats including SQL Light and XML.
And if you're using SQL Light, you actually
also get incremental loading and saving
which can be a huge win if you're
dealing with a lot of data.
Core Data is directly integrated, in fact it's written
to work well with other technologies like bindings
and the Cocoa Controller objects, which makes it that much
easier for you to get your data into the user's interface,
into the user interface where the
user can actually see it and edit it.
As we heard yesterday or possibly before, Core
Data is now also available in iPhone OS 3.0.
So that gives you an opportunity if you're using Core
Data to share code between your desktop applications
and your iPhone applications at the model layer.
And finally Core Data has direct integration with a
number of other Mac OS X technologies that I'll be talking
about in a moment such as Sync Services and Spotlight.
Before we wrap up with Core Data here, I wanted to talk a
little bit more about this object graph management business.
Everything you do with Core Data takes
place within a managed object context.
And this managed object context provides a
lot of functionality for you automatically.
It has Undo support, so any changes that's being made
to your model objects automatically support Undo.
It has well defined hooks for validation
and for conflict resolution.
It provides KVO notification as well as Course
or Grain Change notification automatically.
And it has bidirectional relationship management.
So if you have you know some of your objects point to
another kind of object and then those objects point back
to the ones that pointed them, both ends
of that relationship are managed together
to maintain integrity of your object model.
And finally it supports delete rules that allow you to
properly propagate delete behavior across relationships.
We've really, we've just scratched the surface on Core Data.
And to learn more you can go to the session
this week as well as to the Core Data Lab.
For documentation you should start with the Core
Data Overview or the Core Data Programming Guide.
OK before I move on to some of the cool system
integration technologies, I wanted to take a moment to talk
about where your application and the data that
it creates should fit into the user's system.
We'll talk about where your application goes, where
the data that the user authors in your application goes
and where anything else that your
application might need goes.
Your application should be self contained and relocatable.
Ideally it should just be a single app bundle that the
user can put wherever you want, wherever they want.
If that's not possible, if you have a more complex
application, maybe it's a suite of applications that need
to share frameworks or something, the next best thing
would be to have a folder that contains all of those things
and make the folder self contained and relocatable.
This gives the user the greatest flexibility in
terms of where they want to install your application.
For the data that the user authors within your
application, well in a document-based application,
the user is thinking about that data as documents
and they should be the one who decides where it goes.
Your Save panels can default to
the user's documents directory
but ultimately it's up to them where the stuff gets put.
But that's not quite the case for Shoebox applications.
In a Shoebox application, the user really
isn't thinking about where their data goes.
It's in the app.
So you need to decide as the app
developer where this data gets stored.
And generally it should go into the user's library.
And what you want to do is create a folder in
there that's named for your application identifier
so that it won't collide with any other application.
And if you want to be nice about it, you should put a
display name on that folder that's your application's name
in case the user goes browsing around in
the library, they won't be so confused.
Finally there's other stuff.
Sort of optional data that may be accumulated
along the way as the user uses your application.
This is the sort of thing that you can put
into the user's application support folder.
Application preferences should just be managed through
NSUserDefaults, let it worry about where to put it.
If you're generating cache data, there's a
special folder for that, the user's Caches folder.
And then finally if you have the need to create
temporary data, you should use a temp folder for that.
Now I've talked about a bunch of locations
and sort of mentioned them by name.
There are APIs on the system that will help you
to find out where these specific places are.
The main one is NSSearchPathforDirectoriesandDomain.
This API you basically give it a constant that identifies
a special place and it'll return to you the path
where you should put the path for that folder.
So the application folder or the document folder, et cetera.
For temporary directories, there's actually a
specific API and its temporary directory can be used
to find a secure location to store temporary files.
OK, enough about disk drives.
Just to review for a second.
We've decided whether we're using NSDocument.
We've decided whether we're using Core Data.
Now let's talk about how your application can
make sure that the data that the user authors
with it fits really well into the
user's overall environment.
The user creates things with your application
and it may be the primary place where they work
with the things that they create in your application.
But that's not all they do.
Sometimes when they're not in your
application, they may want to find things.
They want to preview things.
They want to show things to other people.
Maybe they want to synchronize data
between multiple different devices.
Your application can make it possible for them to
do that with the data from your application as well.
Before we get into the individual technology
though, a lot of these things are predicated
on understanding how Mac OS X deals with file types.
And this is actually a key concept that you
should be sure to familiarize yourself with.
Data comes in lots of different flavors or types.
And on Mac OS X we use UTI, uniform type
identifiers to specify what the type of a file is.
UTIs can also be used to map back and forth
between MIME types or path extensions,
but it's the UTI that's the primary
means of identification for file types.
They're used all over the system.
Launch services uses these to associate documents
with the applications that can open them.
NSDocument is based on UTIs, NApps -- sorry, technologies
such as Spotlight and Quick Look are also based on UTIs.
So it's really important to understand how these work.
To learn more about UTIs, you should check
out the Uniform Type Identifiers Overview.
Alright, let's get into some of these cool technologies.
The first one I want to talk about is Spotlight.
Spotlight is about system-wide searching.
It allows the users to find anything
throughout their system.
And it works on an index that's built up
of metadata about each file on the system.
Plug-ins do the indexing.
So when it comes to needing to understand
the metadata about a particular type of file,
Spotlight looks for a plug-in that can do that.
Now your application can provide
Spotlighter, Spotlight importer plug-ins
for any custom data types that your application defines.
And it can also make use of Spotlight internally.
The first thing that a Spotlight importer plug-in does
is it declares the UTIs that it knows how to index.
This is again how Spotlight finds the
appropriate plug-in to use for any given file.
They also need to define a metadata schema that
basically declares the different kinds of metadata
that the importer will be able to
find about the files that it indexes.
Apple defines a whole bunch of standard metadata attributes.
There's a couple of them listed on the slide
as examples, but there are many, many more.
And when you're writing an importer, you should be sure to
support as many of the standard attributes as makes sense
for the kind of documents or data that you're indexing.
You can also define custom attributes if
you have information that you want to index
that isn't covered by the standard attributes.
It's important to keep in mind that
Spotlight works on separate files.
These are the documents in the document-based
applications, so great, that's easy.
But for Shoebox applications, this requires some thought.
If you want to support Spotlight
for your Shoebox applications,
you need to think about what the individual
things are that should be able to be found.
Because those things need to be written as separate files.
So for example in Address Book, Address
Book saves out each of your contacts
as a separate file so that Spotlight can find contacts.
Core Data can help you to do this if you're
using Core Data to implement your application.
It has support for writing out
external record files automatically.
So you may keep your data, you know mostly in an SQL Light
database, but Core Data can also automatically make sure
to write out separate files for each record.
And then it provides an API so that Spotlight
index importers can access the data that's
in those external records for the purpose of indexing.
Now in addition to providing importers for your custom
data types, you can use Spotlight within your application.
Now this might be as simple as supplying you
know a UI that the user can use to do searches.
But you can be more subtle than that too if you want.
Maybe you can sort of keep track of what the user is
doing, look at the data that they're looking at right now,
and sort of automatically kick off Spotlight searches in
the background to find related information across the system
and bring relevant information to the user's
current context directly to them in your app.
There's a Spotlight lab happening tomorrow.
You can go and talk to the Spotlight
guys and ask them any questions.
And for documentation, you should start with
the Spotlight Importer Programming Guide
and the Spotlight Query Programming Guide.
The next technology that I wanted
to talk about is Quick Look.
Quick Look provides system-wide previews and thumbnails.
And it's used in a number of places.
So Finder uses it to provide system icons, it
uses it for the cover flow view, and both Finder
and Mail for example let you preview content
directly within the applications using Quick Look.
Like Spotlight, Quick Look support is provided by plug-ins.
So your application can provide Quick Look plug-ins for the
custom data types that it defines and you can use Quick Look
in your application to bring nonnative data
into your app and display it to the user.
To implement a Quick Look plug-in,
you basically, like the Spotlight,
you declare the UTIs that your Quick Look plug-in supports.
And then you implement two callbacks, one to
generate thumbnails, and one to generate previews.
For the thumbnail callback, you need to supply an image.
This can be a precomputed image or it
can be one that you generate on the fly.
For previews you have a few other options.
You can supply an image or you can draw it
directly into a dedicated graphics context
if that makes more sense for your application.
Or you can provide your data in a common
format like text, HTML, RTF or PDF.
These formats are ones that QuickTime knows how to
display natively and so it'll handle the presentation
if you just return your data in that form.
In addition to providing a plug-in, you
can use Quick Look in your application.
You can use it to get thumbnails for any file on the system
and then present those directly to
the user within your application.
You can also use it to let the user dive into a full preview
of any content directly from within your application.
So think about how these might, you know these
things might benefit the users of your app.
And especially in concert with the Spotlight
integration that we talked about earlier.
You know, you can figure out a bunch of stuff
that's relevant to what the user is doing,
you know bring relevant information from across the
system to the user, show it to them as, you know,
embedded thumbnails and then maybe let the user dive
into a more full preview experience
directly all within your application.
Go talk to the Quick Look guys in the lab this week and for
documentation start with the Quick Look Programming Guide.
Next up is iChat Theater.
iChat Theater is about presenting data
to other people through video chat.
And you can do this with documents or
really any content in your application.
If your document-based app supports Quick Look,
then you actually get a lot of this for free.
If you'd like to just have the Quick Look preview
presented through iChat Theater, then that just works.
You can also support more advanced
use cases through a session based API.
And that allows you to present any NSView or
a Core Video pixel buffer or an OpenGL buffer
as well as audio content through iChat Theater.
There's an iChat lab this week, so
you could go and check that out.
And for documentation you can start with
the Instant Message Programming Guide.
OK, the last of these integration technologies
that I want to talk about is Sync Services.
Sync Services is about keeping multiple copies of
the same data synchronized in different places.
Now most typically this is between your
Mac and an iPhone or an iPod using iTunes.
It can also be between multiple Macintoshes using .Me or you
can synch with other devices using the iSync application.
To support synching the data of your
application you need to define a synch schema.
And this works best for Shoebox applications where all the
data is together and then you know it's usually record based
and so you know the user may want to synchronize the
contents of their you know libraries across multiple places.
You need to identify what data
gets synched and you also need
to identify how synch identity is defined for your records.
Sync identity is especially important because it
allows Sync Services to determine when it's looking
at two different records, whether
they actually refer to the same thing
and that these two records should be merged together.
Sync Services has a session-based API
that's far too complicated to go into here.
But you can read the documentation to learn more about it.
Although I will say that if you're using Core Data,
you have a huge head start implementing Sync Services.
Core Data has direct integration
with Sync Services and allows you
to define your synch schema purely
by annotating your core data model.
It of course handles local storage of your data for you
and it tracks all the changes that are made to the data
in between synch sessions so that Sync Services
can perform efficient incremental synchs.
You can learn more about Sync Services in the lab this week.
[ Cough ]
And for documentation, you can start with the Sync
Services Tutorial and the Sync Services Programming Guide.
And the Programming Guide is also where you'll
find information about the Core Data integration.
Alright, let's review here.
We've looked at a number of technologies that can
help you make sure that the data the user creates
in your application fits into their
overall working environment.
I urge you to consider how adopting any of these
technologies would make sense for your applications
and to do so to make sure that you have the
best experience possible for your users.
Now I'd like to talk a little bit
about how you can make sure
that your application has the broadest possible audience.
The people who might want to use your
application, they come from all over the place.
They may speak different languages
and have different cultures.
Other people who may want to use your
application may have disabilities.
And still others may look to your application
to be part of the solution to a larger problem
that they couldn't solve with your application alone.
If you keep all of these folks in mind
when you're creating your application,
you can make sure that your application
may become useful for all of them.
We'll talk about a number of technologies
that are related to this.
And let's just dive right in.
The first one is internationalization.
Internationalization is all about making sure
that your application can be used by
people from anywhere in the world.
There are two main facets to internationalization.
One of them is localizability and the other
one is handling international content.
And we'll tackle them one at a time.
Localizability is about making sure that your application's
interface can be translated into multiple languages.
Mac OS X makes this really easy.
And if you just sort of pay attention
a little bit to this from the beginning
of your app development, then it's almost no effort.
Interface specifications can be per region
and in fact they typically are by default.
And NSBundle and its APIs make sure
that when you look up resources,
you'll automatically get region specific
resources when they exist for your app.
Finally, Cocoa has some tools to help you make sure
that any text that's in your source code that will end
up being presented to the user can also be translated.
Now once you've made your application
localizable, of course then you need to decide
which languages you actually want to translate it into.
And that's a different story.
But in order to be in the position to
even do that, you have to be localizable.
The other aspect of internationalization
is handling international content.
And in fact this one is even more
important than localizability.
There are differences between the
different regions of the world.
They speak different languages and
have different writing systems.
People handle time and numbers
and currencies in different ways.
Now, if the user is able to type text into
your application, can they type German?
Can they type Japanese?
Can they type Arabic?
Will you be able to save it properly if they do?
Does your application work with dates at all?
Does it handle non-Gregorian calendars?
You want to think about all of these things.
Now, luckily Cocoa actually makes it
pretty easy to deal with this stuff
if you just use the technologies that it provides.
So all text handling in Cocoa is based on Unicode.
And Cocoa has a sophisticated text system that
can handle pretty much any language in the world.
If you're using all that stuff, then you know it's easy.
It'll just work.
Similarly there are classes for
dealing with dates, different calendars
and formatting of numbers and, and other data types.
Use these things and they'll automatically function
correctly for the locale that the user is in.
Internationalization on the Mac and on the
iPhone are actually pretty much the same.
And you can see that from the sessions and labs we have.
They combine both Mac and iPhone together.
You can go to these and learn more about it.
And for documentation you should start with the
Internationalization Programming Topics Document.
Next up is accessibility.
Accessibility is about making sure that your application
is usable by people with various disabilities.
Now, over a number of years, a lot of research has gone
on in the computer industry to help make sure that people
with various disabilities can effectively use computers.
And Cocoa has a lot of support for this built right in.
To make sure that your application is accessible,
there's a few things that you can do that'll be
of benefit to anybody who uses your application.
Support full keyboard access, this is really important.
Don't override system key equivalents especially the ones
that are associated with accessibility functionality.
Always provide alternatives for drag and drop work flows.
And finally in multiple step work flows, if at all
possible allow back tracking or canceling out of them.
Again, these things will help anybody
to use your application.
In addition to that though, you want
to keep in mind a few specific things.
There are lots of different color blindnesses out
there and some of them are actually quite common.
So you want to avoid having UI elements
that are distinguished only by their color.
Never use an audio cue in your application as
the only way to alert the user to some state.
And finally when you're designing
interactions in your application,
avoid ones that require multiple gestures in rapid sequence.
Cocoa provides a model for accessibility.
And all of the standard UI elements work with that model.
In a lot of cases, all you need to do in your
application is provide accessibility descriptions for all
of your interface elements that explain exactly
what their purpose is within your interface.
You can also link related user interface elements together
so that accessibility can make those
relationships known to the user.
If you write custom user interface, you
may have some additional work to do.
You may have to expose substructure and other
accessibility information about your custom views in order
for them to work well with accessibility.
And you may need to support relevant
accessibility attributes and actions.
You can use the accessibility inspector
application and voice over to check
to make sure that your application is accessible.
There's a ton of content this week about accessibility.
So you can, you can go and learn a lot more about it.
For documentation, start with the Accessibility Overview
and the Accessibility Programming Guidelines for Cocoa.
Alright, next up is Scripting.
If your application is scriptable, it may
be interesting to whole groups of users
who wouldn't otherwise be able to use it.
They might use it to construct larger
workflows that involve other applications.
By using automater or by just writing scripts.
They may be able to automate repetitive tasks
within your application through scripting
and in some cases you might even allow for people to write
scripts that extend the functionality of your application.
When it comes to scripting, you want to start early.
It's easier to make your application scriptable if you
do it from the beginning than it is to try to do it
to an already written application at the end.
The primary thing that you need to do to make your
application scriptable is define a terminology.
The scripting terminology basically describes the way that
users talk to your application through scripts, the nouns,
and the verbs that are available to them.
The terminology should match the user's
conceptual model of your application.
Scripting an application isn't
about scripting the user interface,
about writing scripts that click
buttons or choose menu items.
It's about driving the core concepts of your application.
Now if your internal application model matches
up with the way that you want users to think
about using your application, then
actually this becomes pretty easy.
In fact there's a lot of things
that will become a lot easier
if you can keep those two things
consistent with one another.
In that case, all you really need to
do to support scripting is to make sure
that your model objects are key-value coding compliant.
And then implement any custom scripting command
handlers for the various classes where they make sense.
Again, lots of information about
scripting at the conference.
Go and check it out.
And for documentation start with the Cocoa Scripting Guide.
Alright, the last of these technologies
I want to talk about is services.
Services are all about making certain features of your
application available in the context of other applications.
Services can transform data.
For example, you might have a service
that takes text as input, summarizes it,
and then returns a textual summary as output.
Or maybe you have one that takes an image as input,
runs optical character recognition over
it, and returns the text as output.
You can also have services that simply produce data.
Maybe a service that takes a screenshot
and returns the image as its result.
And finally you can have services
that simply trigger behavior
in your application based on data in other applications.
So for example, Safari's Open URL service or Mail's
Send Selection service are examples of these.
Services are really great for common data types.
Because lots of different applications understand them and
so if you can provide a service that works in terms of text
and images and files and other things that
lots of other applications understand,
then you make your application useful
in these other contexts as well.
Providing services is pretty easy.
You need to identify your candidate behaviors.
Mostly you should look to things that your
application does that are fairly self contained
and that act on input data and/or return output data.
Once you've got these, you implement a single object
to be the service provider for your application
and each service you want to provide
will be a method on that object.
NSPasteboard is used to communicate data,
the input and output data for services.
There's a fair amount of content this week about services
and in fact there's been some really exciting
developments in services in Snow Leopard.
So you should go and check these out.
For documentation you can start with the Cocoa,
sorry with the Services Implementation Guide.
Alright, there's a few other sessions that didn't really fit
into the other you know specific
topics that I wanted to point out.
What's New in Cocoa actually happened earlier this morning,
but if you missed it you can catch it on iTunes later.
The companion session to this one which is
all about user interface design is going
to happen in this room right after lunch.
That one I really recommend.
And then there's the Cocoa Tips and Tricks session,
which happens a little bit later this week.
Alright, so we've kind of had a fast, you know fast paced
overview of a lot of technologies in Mac OS X today.
And we haven't even hit all of them.
It's actually a challenge to know all of the things that
are available for your application to take advantage
of in Mac OS X so that you can know which ones
are appropriate for your application to use.
We hope we've given you a bit of a help
today in knowing what those things are.
And we hope that we may have given you some ideas
for how you can use them in your application.
But most of all we hope that you all go out
and you write really great Mac OS X applications
using these technologies so that we can use them.
All right, that's it.